CREDITS
=======

* Martijn Faassen

* CONTACT Software

* contributions by Souheil Chelfouh and Alex Garel

History according to Martijn
----------------------------

The genesis of Morepath is complex and involves a number of projects.

In 2006 I co-founded the Grok web framework. The fundamental configuration
mechanism this project uses was distilled into the Martian library:

https://pypi.python.org/pypi/martian

Martian was reformulated by Chris McDonough (founder of the Pyramid
project) into Venusian, a simpler, decorator based approach:

https://pypi.python.org/pypi/venusian

Now Morepath uses Venusian as a foundation to its configuration system.

In 2009 I wrote a library called Traject:

https://pypi.python.org/pypi/traject

I was familiar with Zope traversal. Zope traversal matches a URL with
an object by parsing the URL and going through an object graph step by
step to find the matching object. This works well for objects stored
in an object database, as they're already in such a graph. I tried to
make this work properly with a relational database exposed through an
ORM, but noticed that I had to adjust the object mapping too much just
to please the traversal system.

This led me to a routing system, so expose the relational database
objects to a URL. But I didn't want to give up some nice properties of
traversal, in particular that for any object that you can traverse to
you can also generate a URL. I also wanted to maintain a separation
between models and views. This led to the creation of Traject.

I used Traject successfully in a number of projects (based on Grok). I
also ported Traject to JavaScript as part of the Obviel client-side
framework. While Traject is fairly web-framework independent, to my
knowledge Traject hasn't found much adoption elsewhere.

Morepath contains a further evolution of the Traject concept (though
not the Traject library directly).

In early 2010 I started the iface project with Thomas Lotze. In 2012 I
started the Crom project. Finally I combined them into the Comparch
project in 2013. See that project's CREDITS.txt for more information
on its history. The Comparch project provides the fundamental
registries that Morepath builds on.
 
In 2010 I wrote a system called Dawnlight: 

https://bitbucket.org/faassen/dawnlight

It was the core of an object publishing system with a system to find a
model and a view for that model, based on a path. It used some
concepts I'd learned while implementing Traject (a URL path can be
seen as a stack that's being consumed), and it was intended to be easy
to plug in Traject. I didn't use Dawnlight myself, but it was adopted
by the developers of the Cromlech web framework (Souheil Chelfouh and
Alex Garel):

http://pypi.dolmen-project.org/pypi/cromlech.dawnlight

Morepath contains a reformulation of the Dawnlight system in its
resolve and publisher modules.

In 2013 I started to work with CONTACT Software and combined these
lines of development into Morepath: the Comparch registries,
decorator-based configuration using Venusian, and traject-style
publication of models and resources.
